All right, let's move on to part five.
Let's talk about actually
inferring functions.
This is a big part of programming and
unsurprisingly a big
part of type checking.
So let's get into it.
First off, we're gonna start off with
conditionals, which are not functions, but
have a good number of things in
common with inferring functions.
So, since we wanna learn how
to infer conditionals anyway,
they're kind of a nice little on-ramp.
We're about to talk about next, which is
in first inferring function declaration.
So, this is we're actually writing out,
this is the body of the function.
These are the arguments that states, etc.
And then finally,
actually inferring function calls.
So, calling functions, as it turns out,
is actually a little bit of
a different beast than declaring
them when it comes to type checking.
Okay, so we're gonna start with
conditionals as sort of the nice little
onward ramp here.
So again, we've got our const an equal hi,
this time we're gonna,
instead of the classic B equals A, or
something like that, we're actually gonna
define a variable called Cond, which is
gonna be the condition of our conditional.
So this is like the if, it would be what
comes in the parentheses right after if.
But since we're doing only ternaries here,
for reasons that we'll talk about later,
we're just gonna say Cond equals true, and
that's what's gonna be our
condition in our ternary.
And then finally,
we actually have the ternary.
We're saying const b equals and
then con parentheses a colon other.
The reason we're doing ternaries here
is that basically if you know how to do
ternaries when it comes to type inference
and type unification, if it's very simple.
It's basically just like this part isn't
allowed, so there's just strictly less to
think to think about, especially if you've
already got a concept of statements,
which we do in this language.
So, yeah, if you want to think
about it as if you just can, but
ternaries are more interesting because
they evaluate to a value, and so
we get to talk about that aspect
of how we unify all that.
All right, in this language,
we are not gonna get into truthiness.
Somebody asked earlier about scenarios
where you have like plus can accept either
strings or numbers.
Truthiness is in a similar boat where like
if you're trying to infer the type of con
and you're like, well, it could be this or
it could be that or it could be that.
Truthiness, I guess, can theoretically
go as far as to say like it could be
anything and we might accept it there.
We're not doing that, we're just gonna say
this has to be a Boolean, that's the rule.
Cuz if you're going all the way,
then you could actually just say like,
there is no constraint.
It's just literally you can put whatever
you want there and it'll type check.
I guess that would work, but
then that's not very reliable at runtime.
Pretty much every language that uses
Hindley Miller has the rule that it's
like, no, if you're doing a conditional,
the condition has to be a Boolean.
True or False, that's it.
So that's what we're gonna do here.
And then the other rule that we have
here is that we have two branches for
the condition.
But unlike with
the multiplication scenario,
we don't know what those
are ahead of time.
We don't know these are both numbers.
We just know they got to be the same.
So why do they have to be the same?
Well, we're trying to assign them to be.
So imagine if you're like, okay, this
one is a string, but this other thing,
this isn't a string,
this might be a number.
So if you take this branch,
you get a number.
You take this branch, you get a string.
Well, then okay, fine.
So what's the type of B?
It's like string or number?
I mean, yeah, that's maybe nice.
You see why Typescript has union
types as a language feature, but
we're not gonna get that fancy.
We're gonna say, no, no, no,
it's If you're gonna have a condition with
two branches, and either those branches
can end up being assigned to something
here cuz it's a ternary then guess what?
I don't know what type they are.
You can put whatever type you want there,
but it's got to be the same type.
They have to be able to unify with
one another, otherwise type mismatch.
So, this is gonna be our first example
of a type mismatch that can come without
actually having a hard
coded type involved at all.
We're just saying, hey,
if these are two different concrete types,
I don't care what the concrete types were,
if they were different, type mismatch.
Okay, so really, what this sort of reduces
down to is, essentially, it's like,
okay, these three things all
have to be the same type.
Whatever type they are, they're all
gonna end up being the same thing.
These two have to be the same type
because that's the rule of the branches.
And then this one has to be the same
type as those because it's being
assigned to them.
So, it's either going to be assigned to
a or it's gonna be assigned to other,
depending on whether Cond is true or
false.
And so because of that, we basically can
just simplify that down to just saying,
like, look, all three of these
things have to be the same type.
They all need to get unified
together with one another.
Okay, so let's go and do that.
So as we do more and more of these
unifications, I'm gonna kinda
speed run a little bit setting up the Ids
that we're gonna put in our database.
So here we go this is basically
the same kinda stuff we've seen before,
a is 0, a is symlinked to 1is a string,
2 is symlinked to 3,
and 3 in this case is a Boolean.
I'm gonna use the term
Boole rather than Boolean.
I'm not gonna lie mainly because I
didn't wanna have it run off the side of
the slide.
But there was a little bit of interesting
history there, which is that booleans
are invented by the logician George Boole,
which is spelled B-O-O-L-E.
We totally have room for an E there,
but I'm just gonna follow programming
tradition and
just mess with that guy's name.
For no reason, just like,
chop off the E and
then some languages go as
far as to make it longer.
They go like, B-O-O-L-E-A-N, like Boolean
and then he still not using his name.
So really, for whatever reason, the
programming rules has decided that this
logician, we will never
use his exact name.
We will only either truncate it or
extend it, who knows?
Anyway, okay, so, now at this point,
we've got our basic types here.
We've got our types database populated,
and what we want to do is we want
to start setting up the relationships
between the conditional and
its two branches and this return
type that it's getting assigned to.
So, we're just gonna go ahead and
assign some numbers to those, and
then we need to add one more here,
which is for the entire expression itself,
like the ternary,
like what it evaluates to.
This is spoiler alert going
to get similar to B, but
it's important that we do have that
as a concept because in not all cases
are we going to be like immediately
assigning this to be like a named thing.
You can also have a ternary like in
the middle of a function call or
something like that or
like an Array element.
So, it's pretty important that we do have
some type in general, like in the general
case, to track, okay, what is
the inferred type of this whole thing, so
that we can unify that
with these other things.
Okay, at first we
initialize these to null.
So, let's just start by unifying this one,
just to sorta get that one out of the way.
So, it's like, alright, initially B, we've
got an idea for initialize it to null,
and then we're gonna unify 4 and 8.
Why are we doing that?
Because just like what we always
do with with conditionals and
equals, it's like you got
the thing to left the equals,
that's your the ID, and
then you have equals, and
then you have what's whatever's
on the other side of the equals.
And there we've conveniently made
this entire eight thing here,
so we're just gonna similarly do that.
It's exactly the same thing as what
we did in the first two consts.
Okay, so now let's move on to five here,
which is the condition.
This is another easy one because
we've said that the rule is that
anything that is in a ternary condition
has to be bool in this language.
So we can basically just pretty
directly say, yeah, okay.
Like, we know that cond is similar to two
because, or, sorry, not simply to two.
It's it resolves the two,
because we're saying, like, yeah, that's,
that's just what that, that look up means.
And then we can take that one
more step and say, like, okay,
this is a bool because
it's in that position.
So, in exactly the same way that when
we were doing the multiplication thing,
we said, both things on either side of
the multiplication operator have to
be numbers.
With ternaries,
it's exactly the same thing,
except instead of it being on
either side of the operator,
it's just like this particular
thing has to be a Bool.
And then, yeah,
we do the resolving it thing.
And sure enough, we say, cool,
that does end up resolving to a Bool.
So, all is well, the fact that 2
was assigned to a Bool and also,
we have the constraint of
that thing being a Bool.
They're both Bools, so we're all set.
If in contrast,
we had said that this is a string, so
the string not a Bool in this case.
Then if you go through
the same unification steps,
you end up with a string attempting
to unify with a Boolean and
then you're just gonna
get a tight mismatch.
So, this is basically just like how the
types are flowing through to end up with
us arriving at a type mismatch for
this condition.
Okay, but so let's put it back to true,
because that's actually what we
want to do with this scenario.
So then we get to
the interesting position of and
I'm kind of scrolling the table
down here a little bit.
So, iDS 01, and two are kind of off
the screen there, but they're still there,
I have limited room on the slide.
So at this point we're saying okay,
now we wanna deal with 6, 7 and 8.
And these are the things where we start to
get into the scenario of saying, it's not
that we're trying to unify them with a
concrete type like bool, like we just did.
Now we're just trying to
unify them with each other.
So initially they're all gonna be null.
And then we're gonna do our unify of 6 and
0 to basically say like okay,
this you know a is lined up with that
thing which we get out of the scope.
7 is unified with string
because it's a string literal.
We just get that from the parse tree node
id like, yep, that's a string literal.
So that's just gonna be a string.
And then finally, we unify 6 and
7 because we're saying these
two have to be the same.
Whatever types they have,
they are connected in that way.
Of note, we do not subsequently go and
unify seven and six,
in part because we don't
want infinite loops, but
also because anytime you're passing
these two arguments to unify, we've
already established the relationship like
we talked about in the previous section.
So, there's no need to do the symmetrical
one where you unify 7 and 6 as well.
It's totally sufficient to
just pick some ordering and
just make sure that
those two are connected.
Okay, and then yeah, sure enough,
that checks out because
we unified 6 with string.
So when you unify 6 and 7,
it's all good, it's just a string.
Now, if,
in contrast We had done it like this,
where 6 is a string from high,
back up here, but seven is a number.
Then, once again, just as we had with
the Boolean scenario, we would get a type
mismatch, not because there was any
hard coded type in here, but just
because those two have to agree, and now
they don't, so put it back to a string.
Okay, and then finally, we have the last
one, which is just basically saying, like,
this whole thing needs to
unify with one of them.
So, I just picked
the first branch at random.
We could have also picked like the other
branch, but again, the point is that
the entire conditional is always going
to evaluate to either one branch or
the other branch.
But since we said like, these things are
connected and we can just pick a branch
and say, yeah, you have to be the same as
one of those two branches worth noting,
by the way, that there are other
ways you can represent this.
So, I've kind of done for this section,
the maximally symlinky kind of way of
doing things, if you want, I guess I
haven't tried this, but conceptually,
there's no reason it couldn't work, that
you could sort of take a shortcut and say,
like, do we really need this
extra type of variable here?
Like, why don't we just have this like,
all right, look like, when I'm Sim linking
B to something, I'm just gonna say,
like, yeah, just simply get to a just,
just go straight to just go figure
out what's in the first branch.
Go take a little peek at the structure
there, and just say, yeah,
I see what's going on over there when
I'm still back in the node stage.
And say, like,
I'm not gonna bother with this whole like.
Formality of having an extra expression
that's just gonna get symbolized in this
anyway, I know that I'm going to
link all these things together.
So, I can just delete some of these and
just get them out of there and
just like cut right to the chase.
There are probably trade-offs there
in terms of like, I don't know,
how easy is your code to read?
How obvious is it like what it's doing?
You're saving a little bit of
memory if you don't do that.
But I can't think of any reason
why either wouldn't work.
But at least the way I've learned it is
sort of like, just as a matter of course,
it's like, yeah, just give all these
things variables and then make sure you
get all the relationships right,
that's the important thing.
There is probably a corner you
could cut here if you wanted to
squeeze out a little tiny bit
of performance in terms of just,
sort of cutting out the intermediary,
just going direct to the source.
Okay, yeah and
then there was that question, hey,
do we need to do the symmetrical one?
And just like before,
the answer is no, we don't.
If we've already unified eight with 6,
there's no reason to unify with 7.
All we ever need to do if we're ever
unifying with one branch, since we already
unified the one branch with the other
branch, there's just no point in.
It's overkill to unify it with
the other branch as well,
because that branch is already
unified with the other branch.
Okay, finally,
there's path compression happening here.
So, the only other piece to all this is
that basically it's gonna go through and
change all these things around, and
eventually we're gonna end up with
a perfectly well inferred conditional,
where we have successfully said
that this thing is a Boolean.
This thing is also a Boolean.
We verified that those line up,
this is a string.
This is also a string, those line up,
the whole thing is a string,
because both of their
branches are strings.
And then finally, if anyone was curious,
b must also be a string.